Hello everyone. Welcome to a new episode of The
Dissenter. I'm your host, as always, Ricardo Lops, and
today I'm joined by a return guest, Dr. Edward
Watts. He is Vasiliadis Professor of Byzantine Greek History
at the University of California San Diego, and today
we're going to talk about his new book, The
Romans, A 2000 Year History. So Dr. Watts, welcome
back to the show. It's always a pleasure to
everyone.
Oh, it's wonderful to be back. I'm, I'm so
excited to talk to you about the book.
Yeah, so we have a lot to cover today.
Let's see how long we can go. So my
first question is, who were or are the Romans,
since in your book you go through 2000 years
of history in Rome, who are the Romans exactly?
Yeah, I think this is an excellent question. It
seems simple and um for antiquity and for the
Middle Ages, it's of course quite complicated. Um, I
think as a basic rule, I think for everybody
that we're talking about in antiquity in the Middle
Ages, um, if they say they are Roman, we
should take them seriously. And if we cannot understand
why they're saying they're Roman, that's more of a
problem for us than it is a problem for
them. So for the purpose of this book, what
I'm looking at is, you know, the, the group
of people that live in a society that say
they are Roman. And I think what's remarkable about
Rome and what makes Rome so different from other
ancient and medieval societies is um Romans were completely
willing to bring new people in and make them
Romans. Uh, THIS was something like Sparta. Sparta collapsed
because Sparta could not do this. It couldn't figure
out how to make more Sparades. Instead, they kept
making less. Um, IN Athens, they also struggled to
figure out how to make more Athenians. In Rome,
this was not a problem at all. And so
a society that starts out along the Tiber River
in, you know, the late Bronze Age in Italy,
um, makes Romans again and again and again and
adapts their ideas and incorporates them into Roman tradition.
And Roman behaviors and Roman political life, um, so
well that you end up with the same Roman
state 2000 years later surviving in Constantinople, 1000 miles
away where the vast majority of people are Greek-speaking
Christians. Um, AND so the Romans are who they
say they are. Um, AND for them, that's simple
and for us You know, it can be complicated.
It doesn't look at all in the year 1200
like the Roman state in the year 800 or
the year 700 BC and yet those people see
a really strong connection even though everything about their
lives are different, the identification as Romans is the
same and, and so for the book's purposes, I
think we take that seriously.
And when does the history of Rome start and
what is the Roman state?
Yeah, so the, the starting point is an excellent
question. Romans believe they know, like the day, right?
The day and the year it started, 753 BC.
It's, you know, it started on that day because
Romulus set up a settlements around the Palatine Hill.
Our traditions are a little more messy. Um, AND
so we have all sorts of traditions again because
the Roman state is continually remaking itself. People who
belong to, um, other traditions or came from other
places want to see themselves represented in the history
of the Roman state. And so we have stories
told by say Greek authors in the first century
BC who speak Greek but are Roman and want
to see Greek and Roman things connected who talk
about About um people wounded in the campaigns of
Hercules who settle at the base of the Palatine
Hill, who ultimately, you know, become part of this
community that Romulus establishes. Um, YOU have Italians who
tell stories about how, um, you know, there were
initially, uh, people who came into the Roman state
from other Italian principalities who then also became Roman.
And so you have this sort of ongoing tradition.
Of, you know, predating that 753 BC moment where
the Roman state is created. Historically, we can't say
753 BC for sure is the moment when something
happens at Rome and before that there were no
Romans and after that there was. Um, WHAT we
can say though is sometime in the 8th century
BC it's pretty clear that you have an organized
settlement um centered on the Palatine Hill and now
if you go to the Roman Forum and you
Walked sort of to the back of it towards
the back part of the Palatine Hill. You can
actually still see post holes um that were drilled
into the bedrock from what Romans believed to be
that initial settlement. And more or less, um, this
corresponds to what we know is going on in
Italy in the 8th century BC to the extent
that um Italians in that period would bury their
dead in, um, you know, the ashes of their
dead in funeral urns shaped like huts. That match
where those post holes would suggest you had huts.
So, you know, our, our sense in the eighth
century BC that this is an organized community is
pretty good. It's pretty strong. Um, WE don't know
753 BC for sure, but more or less, this
is, this is kind of consistent with what we
can see going on.
When it comes to the history of Rome, do
you use the same division of periods that scholars
have traditionally used? There is early Rome from the
8th century BC until around 300 BC, the middle
and later phases of the Roman Republic from 300
BC to 31 BC, the high Empire from 31
BC to. 180 AD and the late empire from
180 to 395 AD. I mean, do you use
that same, or do you use those same periods
or not?
Uh, I try to stay away from that. So
I mean the, the goal in this book is
really to tell the story of the Roman state
in its entirety. And um those periods are extremely
useful because it's very, very difficult as I learned
in writing this book. It's very, very difficult to
tell that entire story. Um, THERE'S a lot of
material that, for example, for the 6th century BC
looks nothing at all like the material you would
use for the 11th century AD. I mean, literally
nothing is the same. Um, AND so it is,
it is very useful and convenient to say, well,
this is, this is where I have the capacity
and I have the interest to tell a particular
Roman story. The problem with that though is there's
nothing about those moments, um, that is so Definitive
that it is worth dividing the life of the
Romans living at that time, um, and you know,
and separating their stories. So every time we decide
we're gonna stop telling that Roman story at a
certain point, we're in the middle of somebody's life.
And they might recognize that this was a moment
of significant change. I mean the 31 BC they
did recognize at that moment, OK, Octavian has now
won the Battle of Actium, something significant has happened
and yet their lives continued. And so if we're
telling the story of the state as it, you
know, looked to the citizens and to the Romans
living in it, making these divisions in say 300
BC when nobody woke up on New Year's Day
and said, oh my God, like now I'm living
in the, you know, the Middle Republic, everything is
great. Um, WE create an artificial sort of separation
in those stories. And that means we don't appreciate
how that story is going to unfold across that
person's life or also across the life of that
state. And so there are a lot of developments
that take an extremely long time in Rome to
unfold that transcend these traditional periods. And on one
level, that's fine. If you're talking about a traditional
period with a set of evidence that you're comfortable
using, that story might not actually be so important
to you. But if you want to talk about
the Roman state in its totality and you want
to actually understand What it is that makes this
state so unique in lasting for 2000 years. I
mean, every state ends, but no other state lasts
for 2000 years. If we want to understand what
makes Rome so unique and so powerful and so
capable of, of enduring for so long, we need
those stories that transcend these traditional boundaries, and we
need to understand a lot. Lives of the people
that are um functioning and, and living their daily
lives at the moment that we might want to
sort of draw a line and say, OK, well,
I'm done, right? Um, THEY'RE not done. It's, it's,
you know, their 40th birthday. They're still, they've still
got 15 years to live, right? Their story is
continuing and if we stop, we are losing the
last part of their story.
That's very interesting. So, but when it comes to
the earliest period of Rome in the 8th century
BC, how well can it be reconstructed?
Not very Um, so I think the, the, uh,
the thing that we have that's quite interesting is
we do have sources that talk about this. Um,
SO, When we, for example, look at sources that
talk about the development of the city of Rome,
some of this is, is mythological, right, right. Romulus
may or may not have been a real person,
but very little of what's said about Romulus is,
you know, factual. It's, it's storytelling. The same is
true of the second king, Numa, who is the
lawgiver who, you know, is, is an almost mosaic
figure and you look at this person, you're like,
oh yeah, we see the lawgiver in lots of
different traditions and Um, not a real person, probably
in most of the sense of what we hear
about them. Uh, BUT we do have things that
suggest, you know, processes unfolding already at that early
moment in, in and around the city of Rome,
um, in and around the Palatine Hill that really
suggests a, a process of development that we can
understand and we can acknowledge probably as Right. So
there's a, a great source that's written many hundreds
of years later um by an antiquarian named Pliny.
Uh AND what Pliny is doing is, is looking
at um records that talk about people who attended
religious festivals and cities that attended religious festivals. And
he mentions three cities that no longer exist. Um,
AND he identifies them as cities that were once
on hills of Rome. Uh, NO, we don't know
that these cities were conquered. What, what seems to
have happened is, you know, the hills in Rome,
some of them are, are relatively large, like the
Esquiline Hill is a pretty large hill. Some of
them are very small. The Capitoline Hill is a
very small hill. Um, AND what seems to have
happened is, you know, settlements started on these, these
hills. And then they got too big for the
hills, so they grew down into the valleys. And
so the Roman Forum is basically the valley between
a set of hills in the central part of,
of Rome and obviously, it's clear what happened there.
The settlements on the hills grew down into the
Forum and they merged. And as they merged, those
settlements became something bigger. And so we don't have
wonderful records from the 8th century BC saying how
that happened. But it's pretty clear from records that
come later what was going on. The other thing
that we can say with, with pretty good conviction
is um there is a process by which the
um Members of the Roman state work together to
choose a sort of government. Now, in the 8th
century BC we don't know exactly how that process
works, but we do know in the 6th century
BC how the process works in a fashion that,
that could work perfectly well for earlier periods. Um,
WHERE you have a hereditary aristocracy that we can
actually document, um, in places like central Italy through
burial remains and other things. They more or less
nominate a king and everybody else then votes to
approve the king. This is exactly what you'd expect
in a small political society. Um, AND as these
settlements grow, you would expect that this could be
scaled up to include the hereditary aristocracy from other
hills. Uh, AND so I think we can see
in the 8th century BC a set of processes,
um, that would make total sense even though we
don't have evidence for them in that period. We
have evidence from later periods that would totally resonate
with what we imagine could be happening in those
moments. Um, AND so this is, I think the
problem and the solution, right? We don't have really
good evidence for politically what's going on in Rome
before about like the mid-sixth century BC, but the
institutions in the 6th century BC are very well
established and they make sense for what would be
their. Before. And so I think we can say
there is a state structure, there's a political structure,
there's a set of ideas that govern how relationships
in this very small society worked, um, that, you
know, would be perfectly consistent as that society grows
with what we see in the 6th century.
OK, so now and I guess for most of
the rest of our conversation we're going to go
through some of the major events and figures in
the history of Rome. So starting with the Roman
Revolution, what was that and who was Servius Tullius
and what role did he play?
Yeah, so this is a great question. So I
mean the moment that we, we sort of shift
from like let's talk about these mythological figures to
let's talk about real figures is roughly the period
right before this Roman revolution happens. Uh, AND so
the, the first king where I feel like we
can say, OK, this is a real person and
we can say real things about them, um, is
what the person who is now marked as the
5th king of Rome. I mean they think he's
way more than the 5th king of Rome, but
he's the, the, um, Third to last king of
Rome, right? There's traditionally 7 kings of Rome. This
is a man named uh Tarquinius Priscus. And what
we know about Tarquinius Priscus is he was not
born in the city of Rome. He was born
in the, the Etruscan city of Tarquinia, uh, and
he's descended from Greek immigrants. And so, um, he's,
his potential for, uh, for life in the city
of Tarquinia is extremely limited and his wife Tanaquil
gets very frustrated by this and says, you know,
we need to immigrate. And so they go to
Rome and we're told they go to Rome because
Rome is a place where it doesn't really matter
what your family background is. If you are capable
and you have um talents that you can provide,
you can rise to leadership. And uh Tarquinius Priscus
does this. You know, he rises to a position
of leadership um because he has, you know, skills
and talents and things that make the Roman state
better. But the, the king who preceded him, um,
his sons get very upset that Tarqui Phineas Priscus
has in a sense jumped the line, right? They,
they believe that they should have been considered for
the kingship and they really don't like this idea
of someone who wasn't born in Rome, of Greek
parents, you know, or of Greek ancestry coming to
Rome and becoming king. So they, they arranged to
have him assassinated. And in this assassination, he is
attacked, but he survives for a little while. And
so his wife, while he's still alive, brings him
into the palace, she locks the doors, she kicks
everybody out, uh, and then she summons his military
commander who's a man named Servius Tullius. And Servius
Tullius is actually um the son of a slave.
Right? And so again, this is the story of
Romans taking capable people regardless of their backgrounds and
putting them in positions of authority. And what um
Servius uh what um Tanaquil, the wife of, of
Turquinius Priscus does is she goes onto the balcony
of the palace, she tells everybody he's alive, the
king is OK, he just needs to rest and
for, you know, the time that he's resting, Servius
Tullis is going to be in charge of the
state. It's a lie. He's already dead. Uh, AND
so what happens is, uh, Servius Tullius then assembles
power. Um, HE gets the armies on his, you
know, backing him, and then he comes forward and
says, you know what, uh, the king is dead,
I'm the new king. And instead of going to
the aristocrats who were, he believed at least somewhat
complicit in the assassination of Tarquinius Priscus, Servius Tullius
instead builds a new set of power bases. Um,
AROUND the soldiers who are the infantrymen in the
Roman army. And so he changes the political system
so that instead of the aristocrats nominating the king
and everybody else just voting on it, he has
everybody vote to make him king and then he
creates a system of um assemblies in which or
an assembly in which the members of the um
The infantry are given votes according to their property
and their ability to equip themselves with weapons. And
so the majority of the, the most, the best
people in the infantry form the majority of this
assembly and in this assembly now, they, they make
decisions. Des um that bind the king based on,
you know, what the law should be and what
kind of warfare and, you know, peace negotiations they
can have. And so what he's done is he's
shifted the way the Roman state works from something
that is an aristocratic dominated entity to something that
is now uh dominated basically by the class of
people who can serve in the army. And so
he has then um Made it possible for somebody
who is the descendant of a slave to now
run the Roman state in a fashion that has
a sort of constitutional legitimacy. And so this is
the revolution, right? It, it shifts the Roman state
from an aristocratic dominated state to one that is
um dominated instead by the best equipped members of
the army, but it is a state in which
representation occurs and voting occurs. Uh, AND so this
idea of citizenship that goes all the way back
to, you know, the sense of belonging, these early
people on the hill in the Palatine felt. He
does not break with that, right? His revolution is
in a sense a reinterpretation of what role citizens
play in deciding how this state works.
So then how and when was the Roman Republic
established?
Yeah, so the Roman Republic is the aristocratic counter-revolution.
Um, AND so what Servius Tullius is able to
create is something that is like a representative, like
maybe a I wouldn't say it's a constitutional monarchy
because there's no constitution, but it is a monarchy
that is still accountable to to various people and
various stakeholders in the state. He though is murdered
before, you know, he's murdered basically in a plot
by his son-in-law and his daughter. And his son-in-law
is the notorious Tarquinius Superbus, um, who is, you
know, the final king of Rome. And what he
realizes, um, you know, he had used aristocratic backing
to launch this plot, and he promised them a
restoration of a kind of a monarchy in which
the aristocrats instead of this assembly were the dominant
force. What he actually delivered was, well, you know,
neither an aristocratic, um, accountable. Monarchy or a monarchy
that was accountable to, you know, to the assembly.
Instead, he basically made the state his own thing.
And so he governed the state using mainly family
members. Um, HE didn't believe he should be accountable
to anybody and um the republic is the aristocratic
counter-revolution that overthrows Tarquinius Subus, uh, and reinstates something
that is basically an aristocratic dominated state but without
a king. Uh, AND so the goal of the
initial sort of um foundation of the Roman Republic
is to not have a king anymore and sideline
that assembly that um That Servius Tullis had created.
And so the initial offices in the Roman state
now are only going to be held by the
hereditary aristocracy, a group that's called the patricians. Uh,
AND for a while, there is, um, there is
a kind of acknowledgement because Tarquinius Superbus is putting,
he's in exile, he's trying to win his throne
back. There's an acknowledgement by both patricians and the
plebeians who are the non-patricians in the state that
they need to work together. But after the death
of Tarquin, the patricians basically locked down the offices
in the state and they make it clear this
is going to be an aristocracy. Uh, AND what's
interesting then is there is a reaction to this
by the wealthy members of the military who had
been the dominant force in the assembly set up
by Servius Tullius. And you have in 494 BC
a conflict between patricians and plebeians that we call
the conflict of the orders um in which wealthy
aristocrats and wealthy non-aristocrats sort of face off and
ultimately decide. They're gonna have both things go on
at once, right? You're going to have the aristocratic
dominated state that the patricians want and alongside this,
you're going to have the military-dominated state and they'll
just figure out how to make this work even
though effectively they're two Roman governments now, they'll figure
out how to make this work. And this builds
a really important thing into the Roman, Roman sort
of political mentality. Um. There are no rules, right?
That it's not clear. You have two things that
are totally contradictory to each other. There are no
sort of governing documents that say this is how
you resolve a conflict between the plebeian assembly and,
you know, the patrician magistracies. They just figure it
out. And the way they figure it out is
not by fighting in the streets, but by compromising
and negotiating with each other. And this is such
an important principle, um, and this is what ultimately
the Roman Republic is gonna be. Um, IT'S going
to be a system in which even though you
have really deep contradictions in how the state should
work. Those contradictions will be resolved not by fighting
in the streets, but by negotiating with each other
and finding some sort of consensus and compromise that
both sides can agree to. And ultimately, I mean
it takes 200 years, but ultimately, peacefully, these groups
figure out how to blend their two versions of
the, the republic into one and this creates a
really, really powerful political entity, but it's also a
political entity that has this deeply ingrained. The idea
that people who are Roman and are citizens of
this entity have an obligation to this entity because
they own it collectively. They are all kind of
stakeholders in it. Um, AND so therefore they are
all responsible for making sure it works without violence
and without trampling on the rights of other people
who are citizens. And so I think this is
the great achievement of the republic and this is
what makes it so remarkable. I mean, it's impossible
for us to conceive of a state in a
modern context where you have two governments. Uh, THAT,
that don't have anything in common and how they
are supposed to be running the state who agree
to basically work together to just sort of resolve
any disputes they have even though there aren't laws
that really govern what those disputes should be until
ultimately, you know, over 200 years, they figure out
how to make this all kind of fit together.
Yeah, the way the Roman Republic was sort of
organized politically was really very interesting. So, but over
time, how did it expand and how did Rome
go about absorbing most of the Italian peninsula?
I think again, I mean this, this, this basic
idea of like we as Romans, we, we take
what's good, um, we incorporate, we don't exclude. Uh
THIS is how Rome, how Rome does this. Of
course, Rome is very good at fighting. Its military
is very good. It always is a very good
military. Um, BUT the secret to Rome's success is
what comes after they win the battles. You know,
so you can defeat a city, you can defeat
a, you can defeat a sort of confederation of
cities. What do you do next? And what Romans
realized is, you know, the thing that we can
do next is we can incorporate them. So we
can make them citizens and if we make them
citizens, um, you know, they vote in our elections.
They're part of this political process. They're part of
this sort of larger, um, this larger structure that
we as Romans value and of course, we have
a bigger army. Um, OR we can make them
allies. And, in, in practice, um, we might think,
oh well, being a Roman citizen, that would be,
that would be like the gift, right? That's what
you want. You don't want to be an ally.
You, you want, you know, full participation. The reality
is these cities actually would prefer to be allies
over being citizens because at least as an allied
state, you run your own internal affairs. But that's
in a sense a gift the Romans are giving.
So it means they trust the people in that
city to run its own internal affairs, but the
allies are also required to give troops to the
Romans. And so, um, one of the great limitations
that a lot of ancient city-states face is again
going back to Athens and Sparta. They have real
trouble expanding their citizen base and that really limits
the amount of um casualties they can take in
a war. So, you know, part of the issue
that the, the Spartans run into in the Peloponnesian
War is there just are not that many Spartan
citizens. And so when you have a bunch of
Spartan citizens captured in, in Sphacteria, for example, Sparta
is panicked because they have a few 100 citizens
who are like captured, right? And it's a huge
crisis. What do you do with these, you know,
what do we do? We have to get these
citizens back. Rome did not have that problem. Uh,
Rome could feel by the, uh, by the 3rd
century BC they could field armies of 100,000 people
because they kept bringing in new people and new
allies and, and new citizens. Um, AND, and so
what that meant was Rome had this really unique
ability to replenish its military power because it had
this unique ability to incorporate new people into its
society and make them stakeholders who were invested in
the success of that society. Uh, AND so you
do have moments, um, In Rome's conquest of Italy
where it, it's kind of touch and go whether
this model will fall apart. Um, BECAUSE until those
people really are bound into the Roman state, they
can say, you know what, like that was great
and we got a lot of, you know, money
and plunder and, um, you know, fighting with the
Romans. That really helped us, but now the Romans
look like they're weak, so we're gonna bail and,
and do our own thing again. There were moments
where that, that became a real problem. Um, BUT
not that many. AND mostly what Rome was able
to do was win those battles because militarily you
could fight quite well, lock those people into this
promise of, you know, you could fight with the
Romans and share in the proceeds of our victory
or you could fight against the Romans and we
will take those things from you. Uh, AND most
people in Italy said, yeah, I think we're on
the Roman side. We'll, we'll go with you, um,
and do that. Um, AND there were moments that
This, uh, this coalition was threatened, you know, the
invasion in 280 BC by Pyrrhus, um, the wars
with Carthage. There were moments where this, this coalition
was threatened. Um, BUT mostly what Rome was able
to do was make The political adjustments and the
military adjustments necessary to keep this coalition together, uh,
and, and that gave Rome a very, very strong
base of citizen soldiers that made it um superior
to really anybody that it was fighting.
So if we're covering the history of Rome here,
I guess that one thing that we can't really
avoid talking about is the rivalry between Rome and
Carthage. So how was it and how did the
Punic Wars play out?
Yeah, so this is um the Punic Wars in
a sense, um. I don't want to say they
were inevitable, but they were almost inevitable because as
you have this emergence of Rome as the dominant
power in Italy, a lot of what, what locked
those cities, those allied cities into their alliances with
Rome was this promise of yes, we're going to
go and beat up on people and you and
your soldiers can steal things. Um, AND eventually, you
know, the Italian peninsula is a peninsula and it's
finite, right? And eventually they get the whole thing.
Uh, AND so in 264 BC there is an
appeal by a group of people who are really
disreputable and they're, they're kind of like a group
of like bandits or even terrorists who seize a
city in northern Sicily and start using it as
a base of operations. Uh, AND so one of
the leading powers in Sicily marches out against them.
And they appeal to both Rome because they have
this Roman citizenship connection and Carthage, that is the
other major power in Sicily that is really concerned
about um Syracuse which has advanced on this mercenary
city. The Carthaginians show up first, uh, but then
the Romans show up and they tell the Carthaginians
like back off, right? This is our city. The
Carthaginians then get terrified that the Romans are now
going to do to Sicily what the Romans had
done to Italy. Uh, AND so this ultimately because
of a series of um Miscommunications and you know,
basically actions that were not intended to lead to
full-scale war. It ultimately becomes a full-scale war that
lasts for about 25 years. Uh, THE challenge is
that Carthage is a naval power based outside of
what's now modern Tunis. You know, Carthage is a
suburb of modern Tunis right now. Um, Rome is
not a naval power. And so Rome has to
basically build a fleet on the fly. Uh, THEY
do this by reverse engineering one Carthaginian ship that
has run aground. They train their sailors by making
them row together on the beach because they don't
have ships for them to practice. They send them
out into battle. The sailors, of course, panic because
this would be the equivalent of you and I
building a navy and sending it out against the
US Navy to compete, you know, it, it, they're
terrified. Uh, AND so Rome ultimately decides um in
this conflict that they are going to just kind
of Out muscle the Carthaginians. So the initial thing
they do to win naval battles is they build
a gangplank so that they could just drop it
on the Carthaginian ships and send marines to fight
a land battle in the ships. Uh, AND then
ultimately, you know, because the Romans are, um, and,
and they have such a large population base of
citizens, they just outlast the Carthaginians. Um, THE first
Punic War is, is a is massive in the
amount of destruction it, it wreaks. Um, BUT Rome
is able to absorb that destruction and, and those
losses better than the Carthaginians are. Um, THE second
Punic War is the one that everybody is familiar
with. This is the War of Hannibal. And Hannibal
launches that war in part because he's, he wants
to wreak vengeance on the Romans. Uh, AND he
has a strategy of trying to inflict as many
casualties on the Romans as possible to ultimately maybe
break the alliance structure in Italy and deplete Rome's
manpower. And the initial phase of that war, Hannibal
is, is totally successful at this. Um, HE Wins
three very significant battles against the Romans in 218,
217, and 216 BC. And after the final battle,
the Battle of Canai, which is um one of
the most devastating battles the Romans ever fight. Um,
HE does break the alliance structure and so the
Romans then have to basically endure huge disruptions. Um,
BUT they do rebuild their alliances and then ultimately
defeat Carthage. Uh, AND you know, and then ultimately
they fight a third Punic War which, um, leads
to the destruction of the city of Carthage. But
what the Punic War shows everybody, what the Punic
Wars show everybody in the Mediterranean is Rome is
not a normal Mediterranean state. Um, IT is willing
to do whatever is necessary to win these wars.
And it has the population base and the resource
base that it can outlast really anybody who's going
to fight it. Um, AND this is an important
lesson for both the rest of the Mediterranean and
for Romans because Romans also understand. We are unique.
Um, WE, we are unique in the Mediterranean and
you know, this, if we do this right, um,
we can be protected and we can be a
dominant force in the Mediterranean. The question then becomes
what is doing this right? Um, DOES that mean
we're an imperial power beyond Sicily and Italy? Um,
INITIALLY after the Second Punic War, they don't want
to do this, but by the middle part of
the 2nd century, they realized, yes, I mean this
is going to be essential. Otherwise, we're going to
just keep going back and fighting wars in these
same regions. Uh, AND so by the middle part
of the 2nd century, Rome has decided to use
this massive manpower advantage to expand across the Mediterranean,
start absorbing territories. And as it absorbs territories, it
also starts building in this model of incorporating these
territories, um, slowly. But it does start building in
a, a sort of structure of giving citizenship to
people in these territories, settling Romans in these territories,
right? It is not just going to govern these
territories remotely, it's going to make them Roman. And
this is a slow process, but it is a
crucial process in, you know, understanding why the Roman
Empire is different than, say, the Persian Empire of
Cyrus or the Macedonian Empire of Alexander the Great.
Those are empires that never had any real interest
in making, say, Greeks Persian. Romans, because their model
for controlling territory is building people into this Roman
citizenship structure, this is what they commit to do.
And um from the 2nd century forward, you have
a process of, of trying to build Roman presences
in these territories, but also take people from these
areas and, and like link them to this Roman
state that is now governing them and that's different
and that's new and that's really important um because
it's going to be the thing that really sets
the Roman Empire up um to last for as
long as it does.
Right, but when did the Roman Empire start exactly?
I mean, is there any precise date or not?
Yeah, so, um, so what happens with this process
is, um, you know, as you are spreading Romans
out to these other parts of the Mediterranean. They
get very, very wealthy. Um, AND it creates an
imbalance in the way that Roman society is working.
Uh, AND so this wealth imbalance creates political tensions
that the republic, which is based on consensus and
compromise, is ill-equipped to resolve. You know, because the
wealth is accumulating very, very quickly, and Rome doesn't
have a tax structure like a modern, you know,
modern Western democracy that can say, OK, well, So
there's a lot of wealth accumulating at the top
of, of our society like let's tax them 90%
and distribute the wealth to everybody else. Trump doesn't
do that, right? So people get wealthier and wealthier
and wealthier and it creates all sorts of tensions
in this political entity that's supposed to be, you
know, about everybody being a stakeholder in this, this
shared enterprise. Um, INITIALLY, people try to solve this
through political means, um, but by the 130s BC
it's become clear that um, The tradition of, of
compromise and consensus building is not going to be
effective enough to solve this problem in time. Uh,
AND so you do have an outbreak of political
violence in 133 BC that everybody hopes is, is
kind of isolated but ultimately it spirals and people
begin using political violence more and more to solve
problems within the Roman um polity. Compromise and consensus
sort of starts. To drop away. Political violence becomes
a more and more effective tool. And in the
80s BC there is actually a civil war between
um rival generals who have built armies loyal to
them through um providing those soldiers with rewards for
serving under their command. Uh AND those commanders lead
those armies against the city of Rome. They fight
each other on behalf of their commanders instead of
the state and this ultimately creates a dynamic in
Rome that, that the republic can't escape. Um, BECAUSE
once you don't have this tradition of compromise and
consensus, You don't really have rules to um reconcile
disputes. And so the uh the civil wars in
the 80s, they traumatize an entire generation of Romans
who, these are some of the most famous Romans
that we have, right? Julius Caesar, Pompey the Great,
Cicero, um Cato, right? These are all people who
are of that generation who believe really deeply in
their soul that they want the republic to survive,
but they don't trust that it will. And so
each of them behaves in such a way that
um you know, they, they, they try their best
to work according to the rules of the republic,
but they don't actually believe those rules are going
to protect them. This ultimately leads to a civil
war that Julius Caesar wins. Um, Julius Caesar uh
tries to create a system where he is going
to run the Roman Republic, uh, in a way
that's sort of constitutional, but he's gonna just make
sure everything happens effectively and of course he's assassinated.
And that sparks another civil war that ultimately leads
to the victory by Julius Caesar's nephew, Octavian, um,
the, the Emperor Augustus. And what's different about Augustus
from everybody that came before him is Augustus has
absolutely no faith in the republic. He understands that
the, the ideas are good, right? That the ideas
that this society should belong to its citizens. Those
are good ideas. He also understands that no Roman
is willing to accept something like what um Tarquinius
Superbus did, you know, like the state belongs to
me and my family and like screw the rest
of you, right? This is all my thing. Um,
AND so what Augustus does is he builds a
structure, um, very specific to his own needs where
he is ultimately the decider, but the republic works
underneath him in the places he doesn't care about,
right? So if he, he doesn't care about About
how you run, you know, the province of IKEA.
As long as there's no problem that rises to
his level, run the province of IKEA, right? The
Senate can run that. He doesn't care. He doesn't
care about how you're gonna manage the street sweeping
unless there's a problem. And if there's a problem,
he will come in and fix the problem. But
his whole way of running this is he wants
to be sure that he has enough power that
nobody can dislodge him from authority. He wants to
be sure that he has the authority to fix
anything that becomes a real problem in the state
because the republic lacked that ability. But he ultimately
doesn't want to run the entire state. He doesn't
want to micromanage things. He just wants to be
able to solve any problem that, that arises and
he wants credit for solving the problem, not creating
the problem. And so what Augustus creates is something
that um he calls the restored republic. And in
some ways it is, right? He, he acknowledges that
there are rights to citizens that are guaranteed them
as citizens of this Roman state. He says explicitly,
I don't have any special powers, right? All of
my powers are constitutionally consistent with offices that existed
in the Roman Republic, but what I have is
the authority to kind of regulate things when they
fall out of line. And so this ultimately is,
is the empire, right? Augustus is very smart in
how he does this. He recognizes that there is
no appetite at all in Rome for taking away
this sense that we as citizens own this thing.
But he also recognizes there's no appetite in Rome
for anarchy. And he is very careful to remind
Romans that what, what happens when you have the
republic. IS what happened, you know, in the 40s
and 50s and 60s BC. It's anarchy. There's violence
in the streets. People are getting, you know, murdered
for no reason. There's um no ability to hold
elections. You can't actually decide anything because everybody is
sort of jockeying with position. He, you know, he
promises security. He promises that your rights as a
citizen will be guaranteed. He promises that the state
can act decisively and otherwise, let everything be as
it was, right? This is in a sense the
genius of the empire that Augustus creates. For regular
people most of the time, it does the same
things the republic promised but couldn't deliver. For people
who are in the Senate, yes, they recognize, OK,
in the 60s BC we actually decided what happened
in the Roman state. Now, We decide some things,
but we can be overridden and if something goes
wrong, we are gonna be blamed and Augustus is
always going to be the hero who steps in
and fixes it. Um, BUT, you know, but this
is a really interesting set of choices that Augustus
makes, I think purely because of, um, self-interest, right?
This is good for Augustus to have this system.
But what it does is it creates a way
for this, all of these tendencies that made Rome
exceptional to continue even though the republic as a
sort of representative democracy doesn't really exist anymore. Right?
Citizenship still means something. And so citizenship's expansive expansion
into other parts of the empire, it's something people
still want. Um, IT confers a sort of status.
Uh, AND, and the empire. Because it steps back
and lets people run most everything. It doesn't feel
um dominating. It doesn't feel tyrannical, except for those
senators who are, you know, the 600 people who
sit in Rome and, you know, think they should
be doing something and really sometimes get antsy that
they're not. Everybody else is pretty OK with this.
Um, BUT the basic principles of citizenship matters and
we are going to take new people and make
them citizens continue. But what the empire also does
is, um, emperors realize that there is a way
to leverage this idea of being a Roman citizen
to build power bases that go beyond the traditional
power base in Italy. So what Augustus does is
he takes people from the Italian aristocracy who didn't
belong to the Roman aristocracy. He builds his senate
out of those people because those people are grateful
to him for giving them this new status that
they didn't otherwise have. The Emperor Claudius builds his
Senate out of people from what's now France. Um,
BECAUSE this is another, it's the same thing. He's
extending status to people who, uh, you know, believe
that this is actually a very valuable thing. They're
then loyal to Claudius. But what ends up happening
over time as the empire progresses is these people
who initially got citizenship and thought this was a
great thing, their grandchildren got senatorial status and thought
this was a great thing. Those great grandchildren, some
of them become emperors. And so the empire takes
this process of making Roman citizenship and membership valuable
and it makes it a sort of process of
like integrating every aspect of the state. So that
the empire starts out as something where Augustus is
more or less running, you know, the Mediterranean on
behalf of Italians. 100 years later, the Emperor Trajan
is Spanish. And, you know, and that's fine. It
isn't, it doesn't break the system. It's totally consistent
with how Rome has been, you know, going all
the way back to Tarquitius Priscus coming from Etruria
with his Greek background and becoming Roman king. This
is what Rome has always been, and Augustus. MANAGES
to create a structure in the empire that continues
and retains that basic idea of, you know, what
Rome is and, and why Rome is great and
why Rome succeeds and why Rome is different from
everywhere that has, you know, surrounded it and has
come before it.
So I would like to ask you about a
few of the emperors and their reigns. So what
characterized Caligulas and Claudius, you've already referred to Claudius
here a little bit. What characterized their reigns?
Uh, SO I think what's interesting about this is,
you know, Augustus, he reigned for a very long
time. I, I think the thing that uh we
sometimes fail to appreciate because Roman history is so
long, um, is that Augustus is born in the
year 63 BC. His political career starts when he's
a little less than 19 years old and he
lives to be 76, right? And so, you know,
if, if we like to think that Rome um
lasts for, you know, for 20 centuries. Augustus is
actually, um, you know, he's basically running this thing
for about 2.5% of the entire history of Rome.
He's, he's the main or a main political figure
for about 2 2.5% of the entire history of
the Roman state. And this is um transformative because
you have a sense that um the emperor is
permanent. Right? We, you know, Augustus is there forever,
right, if you were born in Rome and you
make it to 5 years old, your, your average
lifespan is probably about 50 years. And so when
Augustus dies at 76, there's pretty much nobody alive
who remembers what it was like before Augustus. Um,
AND, and then his successor Tiberius reigns for another
23 years. And so there's this assumption that the,
that when you have an emperor, this is more
or less a permanent thing, right? This, they don't
change all that regularly. It's like, um, it's like
how we think about the, the queen, the English
monarchy, right? Queen Elizabeth was there for so long,
it's hard to imagine that you might have like
a king, not be there for 2030, 40 years.
Um, AND When Caligula takes power, uh, he takes
power as a young man, and it's remarkable because
there had not been anybody younger than 50 running
the Roman Empire since Augustus turned 50 in 13
BC, right? Caligula takes power in 37 AD. So
this is, it's weird for Romans to not only
have somebody come in who is, is young, but
also have somebody come in who's relatively inexperienced. And
um it becomes very clear, so Caligula actually starts
out as an OK emperor and ends up getting
sick about a year into his reign and the
Caligula that we all know, the crazy Caligula who
appoints his horse consul and, you know, um, Takes
the entire grain fleet so he can build a
bridge across a bay so he can ride his
chariot across at once, right? The crazy Caligula is
um and he emerges after this illness. Uh, AND
Caligula is such a problematic figure that one of
his bodyguards actually assassinates him. That shocks Romans because
they don't imagine that an imperial reign can end
quickly like that. And they definitely don't think that
somebody who's young is gonna have their term end
quickly. So Caligula dies after about 4 years in
power. Um, Claudius is Caligula's Caligula's uncle. Claudius is
basically made emperor by accident. So after Caligula dies,
uh, the Roman Senate actually, you know, they convene
and they start having a debate about restoring the
republic. The Praetorian Guards, who are the, the imperial
guards in the city of Rome and the only
military force allowed in the city, they find Claudius
hiding behind a curtain in the palace. They trot
him out, they proclaim him emperor, and then they
march to the. Senate and say Claudius is now
your emperor. Um, Claudius is a relatively successful emperor,
but he too dies in a very strange way.
So in 54 AD um Claudius dies after eating
dinner. And the story that's told that I think
is somewhat plausible is he was poisoned um by
eating poisoned mushrooms. And the question is, was this
deliberate or not? Uh, THE story that's told is
his wife had this done. Um, IS that possible?
It's possible. Is it definitive? No. Um, BUT between
Caligula and Claudius, Romans learn that imperial reigns can
end suddenly. And they don't necessarily end with the
natural death of the person, right? They, the people
can die prematurely because someone kills them. And this
changes Roman history, you know, it, uh, it again
is this idea of the possible. So the republic
lasted so long as this thing governed by consensus
and compromise simply because nobody decided to challenge it.
And then in 133, somebody challenges it and everybody
starts saying, oh well, that's possible. How can I
do that? What, what can I do that can
use this sort of ability to um unleash political
violence in a fashion that helps my career. With
Augustus and, and Tiberius, it sort of recedes from
people's mind that you could use violence to change
the imperial regime. Caligula and Claudius sort of show,
yeah, no, you can. You, you can actually use
violence. Um, AND those successions were relatively straightforward, right?
Um, Claudius was, became emperor without um violence in
the city and there's no street fighting or anything.
He is proclaimed emperor. When Claudius dies, Nero takes
power after Claudius. Um, BUT this idea that you
can get rid of an emperor, um, unnaturally, right?
They don't just die, you make sure they die.
Uh, AND then you use violence to take, you
use that violence to take power, this becomes ingrained
in the Roman mentality. And so what Caligula and
Claudia sort of make people understand is if you
don't like an emperor, you can end his reign
and his life at the same time and if
you plan right, you can be the person who
takes over. Uh, AND this is a very, very
damaging thing for Roman history.
OK, so, but then comes Nero, who is one
of the emperors we hear the most about as
well. So what would you like to tell us
about him?
Uh, SO I will say that I am, I'm
something of a Nero apologist. Um, I think so,
so the story that you, I mean the idea
that you have, the two craziest emperors in Roman
history, the ones everybody knows are Caligula and Nero.
Um, AND then there's like another tier below that
that some people know. But, you know, the stories
about Nero, um, are things like Nero is the
first to persecute Christians, that's true. Um, THAT there's
a massive fire in the city of Rome in
64 AD, that's true, um, that Nero started the
fire. That's not true, um, that Nero fiddled while
the fire sort of consumed the city of Rome.
Absolutely not true because he wasn't even in the
city. Um, Nero killed his mother, true. Um, Nero
killed his mother out of spite, probably true, um,
that Nero went to the Greece went to Greece
and like rigged the Olympics so that he could
win. True. Uh, BUT, but beneath all of this
stuff, uh, there is something that I think is,
um, An understanding by Nero that makes some sense,
right? I, I think that Nero Nero had some
ideas that made sense. He had other ideas that
were absolutely utterly crazy, but some of the ideas
made sense. And so, um, so what I'd like,
what I'd like to think about with Nero is
what is he trying to do and why? Um,
BECAUSE his execution generally is abysmal, right? Even when
he had good ideas, he did them badly. But
the, going to Greece to compete in the Olympics,
this actually is an idea that makes some sense
because Nero takes power as a very young man.
Um, HE'S a teenager when he takes power, about
16 years old when he takes power. Uh, AND
initially he's dominated by his mother and the senators
who are allied with his mother. Um, AT a
certain point, he realizes he wants to actually exert
his own, his own authority. He has his mother
done away with. This breaks senatorial faith in Nero
and Nero needs to build a new power base.
And so what Nero decides to do is build
a power base in Greece. Um, AND so the
trip to Greece is about cultivating support in an
area of the empire that hasn't yet been brought
in, um, to this sort of level of senatorial
aristocracy. And it's a good bet because the Greek
world is very, very wealthy. Um, SOME of the
richest cities and most, um, prominent individuals in the
Mediterranean are Greeks who had not yet been brought
into this Roman imperial structure. And Nero is still
a young man, you know, when he's doing this,
um, Nero is, is basically like in his late
20s, early 30s. So this makes sense as a
long-term political play. Nero, of course, is incapable of
doing it right, but it makes sense. And so
when Nero ends up, um, you know, Nero's failures
are so Ridiculous, um, that you end up having
a revolution launched in the northwest of the empire.
He doesn't have the support in Greece that would
allow him to counteract this yet, and he manages
this civil war in like the worst possible way
you can imagine, you know, he is. He falls
into a kind of manic depressive set of episodes
where when he gets good news, he gets super
excited and throws parties, when he gets bad news,
he gets so depressed he can't leave his room.
When he finally decides he's going to um go
and, and, like, lead an army out to confront
the rebellion, um, he's much more. Concerned about how
to get his organ because Nero liked to play
music, how to get his organ alongside the army
than he is actually about strategy. Uh, AND so,
you know, and so Nero ends up dying. Um,
HE ends up committing suicide rather than being killed
in the aftermath of, of, you know, losing his
throne. Um, BUT the outreach to Greece is so
successful that for more than 20 years after Nero's
death, you have fake Nero's emerge leading political movements
in the east trying to overthrow Roman emperors. Uh,
AND so it works. It's just, it didn't work
fast enough and Nero was too incompetent to actually
make it, you know, work during his lifetime. But,
you know, but again, like, a lot of what
Nero does is, is terrible and crazy. Um, BUT
there is an actual sense of, you know, a
plan that could have worked. Uh, HAD a better
person done it in a different circumstance and, you
know, had more time. Um, AND I think what
you see that's remarkable is The seeds of Nero's
plan are actually built upon by emperors in the
70s, 80s, 90s, and 100s AD to build actually
the structure that's going to make the Roman Empire
its strongest in the 2nd century AD. That was
Nero's idea. He couldn't do it, but the idea
wasn't wrong.
So you've already mentioned briefly Trajan. Tell us about
Trajan and Hadrian and what they represent in the
history of the Roman Empire.
Um, I mean, Trajan and Hadrian, I think represent
the culmination of all of this stuff that we've
been talking about for the first century of the
empire. This idea of, of bringing in new people
as first as citizens, then as senators, then as
emperors. The first one to do that is Trajan.
I mean, Trajan is from Spain. Hadrian is also
from Spain. Um, THEY are the first two emperors
not born in Italy. Um, AND They are remarkably
successful. Uh, Trajan is a general who comes in
and, and decides to, um, launch military campaigns that
ultimately lead to the Roman Empire reaching its greatest
extent in, in Roman history. He conquers what's now
more or less all of modern, most of modern
Romania. Um, HE, he conquers the territory between the
Tigris and Euphrates that is the, the sort of
center. Sort of population center of modern Iraq. He
gets all the way to the Caspian Sea, conquering
what's now modern Armenia and Azerbaijan. Um, HE conquers
territory in Arabia that goes into Saudi Arabia. Uh,
HE actually sets foot in the Persian Gulf. He's
a remarkable successful military general. Um, BUT by the
end of his life, it's clear he's overextended himself
and so when Hadrian takes over, Hadrian is also,
um, a Spaniard from, from the city of Italica,
uh, which is basically right near to the, the
modern city of Sevilla. Uh, AND Hadrian decides he
has to pull back from some of this territory
and instead concentrate on integrating more deeply the parts
of the Roman world that, um, You know, that
he sees as core. So he's not, he realizes
it's almost impossible to hold the areas of Mesopotamia
from the West if you don't also hold Iran.
And so he pulls back from them because it's
hopeless. But what he does instead is he focuses
his attention on Those Greek elites that Nero had
started to cultivate that had become more prominent under
uh the emperors between Nero and Trajan. Um, AND
what Hadrian does is he travels the empire really
aggressively and he goes everywhere that you can imagine.
Um, AND he visits cities, he gets to know
those cities. He, he spends lots of money upping
the quality of the infrastructure in those cities. Um,
AND he is very close to Greek elites that
he wants to integrate into this sort of senatorial
aristocracy and build a, a power base that is
a really um firm and secure power base. Uh,
THAT also fundamentally sort of changes the nature of
Greek interaction with Romans. Uh, BECAUSE now, most of
the leading intellectuals, um, business people, and civic leaders
in the Greek world are Roman citizens. Many of
them interact directly with Roman emperors. Many of them
are Roman senators. Um, THE Greek world used to
be something the Romans colonized. Now the Greek world
is Roman. It's becoming increasingly Roman and in the
aftermath of what Hadrian is doing, um, we have
intellectuals who give speeches in Rome where they talk
about how The city of Rome is this unique
thing because it creates this empire that identifies the
most talented people everywhere and it brings them in
um and integrates them into its society and makes
them its leaders. And so now in Greek, the
same model that we've seen all the way back
to, you know, uh, to the to the kings,
the Greek intellectuals are now saying, well this is
happening to us too. Uh, AND we are Roman
and the best of us are as Roman as,
you know, Cato or Caesar, right? We are fully
participating in this as not just subjects but as
citizens and as leaders, uh, and we're invested just
in the same way that everybody else was. And
this I think is a, is a great contribution
that Hadrian makes because he does it in a
way that is not domineering at all. It's about
rewarding these people and providing them with things that
they see to be valuable. Um, AND so, you
know, I think this is the great success of
Trajan and Hadrian, right? There is a, an understanding
of how far you can push Roman territory and
then an idea that, you know, you should draw
a line and focus instead on making everything on
the Roman side of that line fully Roman. In
the way that the Italian peninsula, you know, became
Roman, let's make the entirety of this state that's
the size of, you know, modern Australia. Let's make
this all Roman. Um, AND this I think is
a really, really important contribution that these emperors make,
cause they intend to do it. They understand exactly
what they're doing and why it's important.
So let's talk a little bit now about how
Rome became Christian. So what was the role played
by Constantine in the creation of the Christian Roman
Empire and more broadly, how was Rome made Christian?
Yeah, so I think that this um in a
way it builds on the tradition that we're just
talking about. You know, Hadrian dies in, in, um,
in 139 AD uh A lifetime later, in 212
AD there is an emperor that passes a law
that says that everybody in this empire is now
a citizen. And once you do that, you now
have a structure so that everybody in this empire
can participate in a kind of common project. What
Constantine then does when he converts to Christianity, which
is, he converts to Christianity in 312. So the
extension of citizenship is in 212. Um, WHAT Constantine
then does is he adds a religious kind of
layer to this notion of everybody participates in the
Roman state. So Constantine's conversion is something that um
is somewhat controversial. There's even arguments, there's still arguments
about whether he was sincere in converting. Um, I
personally think there is no argument about that at
all. Uh, IT makes total sense that the story
we're told about Constantine's conversion, which is he's fighting
a war, he doesn't think he will win. He
has a vision, um, where he sees a symbol,
a Christian symbol that then Jesus appears. AND says
that's my symbol, put it on your shield. He
wins a sort of spectacular and unexpected victory. Constantine
is a Christian from 312 AD. Uh, BUT what
Constantine wants to do is take this Roman state
that is now, um, in many ways A nation
state, right? Everybody living in Roman territory from Britain
to Saudi Arabia is a Roman citizen. Everybody living
in Roman territory now shares this common identity legally
and to a degree also culturally and intellectually that
they are Roman. Well, Constantine then um begins to
realize in the first the first sort of cent
first decade after he converts to Christianity. What he
begins to realize is um he has the possibility
of teaching all of these Roman citizens to um
embrace Christianity. And he needs to come up with
a way to do it that's consistent with what
it means to be a Roman citizen, right? And
he needs to come up with a way to
do it that is not imposing this on people
but convincing them. That Christianity is, is a part
of and should be a part of what the
Roman state does. Uh, AND he says at one
point, um, he, he writes a document where he
says Christianity is not new. What Christianity represents is
a return to this old idea where we all
knew at one point as humans, there was God.
And over time, different people, different languages, different traditions,
you know, they lost that sense that there was
one God. What Christianity does is it provides us
with a way to get everybody, you know, Egyptians
and Syrians and Spaniards and people from Gaul and
people from Italy and, and people from Greece, you
know, all of them can realize that their traditions
all go back again to this world. God. And
I as Constantine, I'm going to create structures that
will show everybody in this empire that all of
their diverse traditions, um, religious traditions can be kind
of brought together towards one God in the same
way that all of their diverse political identifications can
be brought together into this like structure that is
Roman. Uh, AND so the conversion of Constantine, um,
It leads to ultimately the Christianization of much of
this space because of the Roman project, because of
the Roman state structure. Christianity is a very appealing
religion in the 4th century AD. It would have
made tremendous inroads across the Mediterranean by itself without
Constantine. Um, BUT it was only probably 10% of
the Roman population that was Christian at the time
Constantine converts. And it's, it's this ability of emperors
in the 4th century from Constantine forward to blend
this notion of, you know, Christianity as a religion
that everybody regardless of your background can embrace with
this notion of we as Romans all share a
common project that gets it kind of over the,
the bump to get it to a sort of
majority status and 100 years after Constantine's um conversion,
Christianity is the majority religion in the Roman Empire.
Probably, you know, even 60% of the empire in
412 is Christian. And I think it has a
lot to do with the understanding these emperors have
of how this state structure and this notion of
participating in a state that also belongs to you
can be used to foster a kind of religious
transformation that these emperors believe also enhances the Um,
the, the success of this Roman political project. I
mean to them, politics and religion work together. This
is better religion. Getting everybody in the Roman state
to embrace it makes everybody in that state sort
of stronger because the state becomes stronger. Uh, AND
so I think that this, you know, I think
what Constantine does is, is in a way, totally
different from anything what, anything the Roman Emperor had
ever done, but also the mechanism is pretty consistent.
With how Roman emperors had always been working, right?
You, you acknowledge the rights of your citizens to
choose, uh, and then you convince them.
So let me ask you now one of the
questions that is, that are the most debated ever.
So what brought about the end of the Roman
West and how did it occur?
I think this is, um, so there are sources
that talk about this in a way that I
think is, is dead on. I think they completely
understood what was happening. Um, I think in a
sentence, the Roman West committed suicide. Um, AND, you
know, and the reason for this is, is, you
know, like everything in Roman history is somewhat complicated.
But, um, basically in 395 AD the empire is
intact. Um, THERE is one emperor, there are co-emperors,
but there's one emperor who is the supreme authority
in both East and West. Uh, AND he dies
prematurely and he leaves a son in charge of
the east who is, I mean, OK, but not
great, and a son in charge of the West
who is a moron. Um, AND, you know, not
capable of doing the job at all. Uh, AND
what happens is the, the, the sort of terrible
qualities of the Emperor Norius mesh with, um, Uh,
sort of almost racism, um, where some of his
generals who do have the best interests of the
Roman West in mind, they get killed, their policies
get, um, overturned simply because they were promoted by
a Germanic general and, uh, and then you have,
um, advisors who frankly don't care about what's going
on outside of their court. This creates a kind
of power vacuum that encourages people who are Roman
places very far from Italy to make decisions that
they would not make if the Roman state was
still strong. So these are decisions like um in
the city of Trier, there is a city councilor
whose wife is insulted. And he decides to open
the gates to a barbarian group to come into
the city of Trier simply because he's, he's angry
that somebody made fun of his wife, right? This
would not happen in a functional Roman state. And
what is he doing there? He's not disavowing his
Romanness. This isn't like he's giving the city over
in exchange, you know, for becoming the Duke of
Trier. He's just angry because somebody made fun of
his wife. Um, AND, and then you have this,
this happening over and over and over again, where
elites in the, um, the parts of the Western
Empire, especially in France, what's now France, but, but
across the Western Empire are making deals that are
against the interests of the Roman state because they're
in their own interests. They don't trust that the
Roman state is um is strong enough to punish
them if they do this stuff. And so they
keep doing it. Um, AND so, and so the,
the fall of the Roman West really is a
set of stories of people acting in their own
very narrow self-interest against the best interests of this,
this sort of common entity that they belong to.
And we have a source, um, a bishop named
Salvian of Marseille who writes about this, where he
says that, you know, you, you have these people
who are, you know, charged with collecting taxes to
build defensive um structures to defend against barbarians and
instead they pocket the taxes and they, you know,
they're corrupt. And ultimately regular Romans decide Why am
I doing this? You know, and they walk away
from, and Salvian says they walk away from their
Roman identity, not because it doesn't mean something to
them, but because it isn't doing anything for them
anymore, right? The state is so unable to defend
them against corruption that why are they gonna trust
it anymore and they just become non-Roman. Because the
people who are in charge of, you know, making
sure that things work like they should have kind
of absconded, you know, the responsibility of being Roman.
And so I think when you're talking about the
swath of territory outside of Italy. It committed suicide,
right? The, these people who were Roman instead of
rallying and defending themselves against these non-Romans who are
coming in, decide that it's better for me personally
to cooperate with them. And so on a very
small level, they're making that same decision that Tarquini
Superbus made, right? The state, it doesn't belong to
everybody. This small piece of it belongs to me.
And I'm gonna do what's best for me regardless
of what happens to, you know, this larger thing.
Um, AND it's a betrayal. Um, AND it's a
betrayal that then we know other people respond to
because our sources tell us once the elites give
up their faith in this project, why is anybody
else gonna have any faith in this project? Uh,
AND so Italy is different, but for the rest
of this territory, a lot of this loss of
Roman territory isn't because Um, these cities are all
besieged excessively and fall apart. There's actually not a
lot of resistance at all. It's just people kind
of giving up.
But then we still have the Roman Empire of
the East. Were the Byzantines also Romans?
Yes, they called themselves Romans. Um, THEY called their
country Romania. They called their language Romaica. Uh, THE
idea of Byzantium, and, and a great person for
this, um, the work of Anthony Caldeli and then
Leonora Nevill, um, they have done really good things
to show where this idea of Byzantium comes from.
Um, NOBODY in that empire had any doubt whatsoever
that they're wrong. In fact, like all of those
sources we talked about earlier that are written in
Greek about early Rome, they survived because Byzantines copied
them, because they aren't Byzantines, they're Romans. And so
the history of Rome in Italy. Uh, MOST of
what we have that talks about it, the best
sort of string of narratives we have are actually
written in Greek because this is the history of
the people living in Constantinople, and they preserve it,
not because it's weird and esoteric, but because it's
theirs. Um, AND so, you know, so when we
think about these people, we, we use words like
Greeks and Byzantines that they wouldn't use to describe
themselves. Um, AND what we do when we talk
about them in that way is we break the
sense of continuity that they understood to be very,
very real. I mean they are living in a
Roman state. They didn't give it up, right? People
in France gave up that state willingly. In many
cases. They didn't. They fought for it. They fought
for it for another 1000, you know, almost 1000
years. Um, AND there's a credit that we have
to do to them by acknowledging this reality because
this reality mattered to them so greatly that they
fought for it in a way that a lot
of people in the West didn't. Um, AND so,
you know, so I think, are they Roman? Absolutely.
Um, AGAIN, going back to this idea, anybody who
says they're Roman, if we don't understand why, we
need to Challenge ourselves, not them. But in this
case, it's very easy to understand why, right? They
live in a Roman state, the same Roman state
that was, you know, founded in the Palatine Hill
in the 8th century BC. They still live in
it. Nothing changed in 330 AD when the city
of Constantinople was founded and scholars want to start
Byzantine history. Nothing changed. Um, AND the people living
in the east. ARE Roman. They believe they're Roman.
They have no reason to not believe they're Roman
and, you know, and their state does not disappear.
It lasts um for a very long time after
that.
And what happened after the death of Justinian?
Well, so Justinian is, um, I mean because again
we have such a, a long scope of Roman
history. There are a few towering figures that come
into, um, you know, come into Roman history and,
and like loom over in some cases an entire
century. Justinian is one of those figures. Um, Justinian
is a, a figure who is incredibly Incredibly smart.
Um, HE'S tireless. The man never, I mean, our
sources say he never sleeps. He says he never
sleeps, but our sources also say he never sleeps.
Um, AND, and he has the intellectual capacity to
really do remarkable things, but he also has a
tremendous amount of arrogance. Um, AND so, you know,
part of what makes the Roman state so successful
for so long is this idea that like we
do embrace what's new. We do embrace innovation, we
do embrace new ideas and new people, but we
also remain grounded to the institutions and traditions um
that made us what we are, right? We don't
radically change things. If we're Rome, we don't radically
change things. We try to change things, you know,
in the margins to keep these institutions as strong
as they have historically been. Justinian didn't believe that,
like at all. Um, AND so there are really
dramatic, um, changes that Justinian institutes in the Roman
state that, um, completely break with the way the
state had functioned before. Um, AND so, you know,
so, so one of these, the most famous of
these is the, um, idea to codify all of
Roman law. Which is fine if you're gonna write
down all of Roman law, but Roman law works
in a process where, you know, the first Roman
legal code was the 12 Tables founded, created around
450 BC. Roman law then built on it and
everything was valid from 450 BC. See through the
time of Justinian in the 520s AD what Justinian
said is, uh, that's not gonna be true anymore.
I'm gonna take all of Roman law. I'm gonna
say what is valid. Everything that I don't say
is valid, is not valid anymore and so Roman
law starts now, right? There's 1000 years of Roman
law that has built upon itself. OK, well, here's
a new line. Everything starts again, you know, now.
That is not how Roman law worked. Um, HE,
when he decided, he decided to go to the
west and reconquer a lot of the territory that
Rome lost. Uh, HE decides to do this, um,
In a way that wasn't really consistent with how
the East had thought about this. You know, the
regime in Italy to most people in the east
in the 5, in the 470s, even in the
510s was a Roman regime. It wasn't a barbarian
kingdom. Justinian decides that it's a barbarian kingdom, I
want to go and take it back. Um, BUT
one of the most significant things that Justinian does
is he um overextends the Roman state militarily and
financially. So he pays for all of this stuff
because he has a real, I mean he has
like a Um, Goldman Sachs level understanding of the
bond market. And he is able to, to use
the Roman bond market to pay for huge amounts
of things. I mean, um, building churches like Hagia
Sophia in Constantinople, building forts all across the Balkans,
invading Italy, invading North Africa, invading Spain. Um, ALL
of these are things that just Indian funds more
or less with bonds, and he builds everything on
this kind of Very um shaky structure, right? He
conquers Italy with a few 10 thousands of troops.
Um, YOU know, when the Romans conquered Italy the
first time in, in the, 3rd century BC, these
were with armies of hundreds of thousands. And, um,
and Justinian has done this and supported all of
this with basically borrowed money. All of this could
work if you had somebody as smart as Justinian
managing all of, you know, the The different moving
pieces of this system, but the system itself is
very fragile and requires somebody who's very smart and
very well in tune with how it works to
keep it all balanced, and the person who follows
Justinian is not that person. Um, AND so what
ends up happening is within the span of about
5 years, he guts the financial system and destroys
the bond market. He, uh, subjects Italy to an
invasion by Lombards that he doesn't have any ability
to counter. Uh, AND then he starts wars with
people in the Balkans and with Persia in the
east and then he goes crazy. Um, AND when
he goes crazy, his wife basically has to sort
of manage all of these problems, but he's so
quickly, um, Loss that balance that Justinian had very
carefully built, that the empire enters a very serious
and prolonged crisis. And so um what Justinian had
built, most people feel that what Justinian had built
was not sustainable. I actually think it was sustainable
if Justinian were managing it. Um, BUT there is
no one like Justinian, right? He is a very
unique figure with very unique capacities, and the person
who follows him, you know, is mediocre and The
risks of this whole very complicated system failing quickly
um are so great that when somebody mediocre comes
in, they, it all fails spectacularly. Uh, AND you
know, and I think this is the legacy of
Justinian, right? In a sense, he is too smart
for the world in which he's operating. And part
of why Rome succeeds for so long is those
institutions, they mean something. And if you have somebody
who is brilliant and scraps all of the institutions
that made a state work, it can function well
when you have someone who's brilliant, but the world
doesn't always guarantee that brilliance is going to follow
brilliance and without institutions to kind of regulate how
things are done. You don't have any structures. And
I think after Justinian what you have is a
collapse of all of the structures that he had
built uh because they were in a sense not
grounded in the long way that the Roman state
had worked. They were instead grounded in his own
really spectacularly complicated thinking. Um, AND, and it causes
a catastrophe. Um, A catastrophe that I think fundamentally
changes, you know, the history of the Mediterranean and
ultimately the history of the world.
Yeah, and we're also going to talk a little
bit more about the factors behind the longevity of
Rome toward the end of our conversation, but how
did the secession of the city of Rome from
the Roman state happen?
Yeah, so the succession of Rome, um, I mean,
in a sense it follows on the, the catastrophic
aftermath of the Justinianic, the collapse of the Justinianic
order, um, because the catastrophes in the east ultimately
lead to, um, the loss of a lot of
Roman territory south of what's now Turkey to the
Arabs. Um, YOU know, Justinian's collapse, you know, was
very nicely timed to coincide with, um, the rise
of Islam and, you know, the, the teachings of
Muhammad. Uh, AND so about, you know, a lifetime
after Justinian dies, the eastern Mediterranean south of what's
now basically southeastern Turkey, it's under Muslim control, uh,
because the Romans lack the ability to maintain control
of this territory, uh, and, you know, the structures
that Justinian had built led to very long warfare
with the Persians that let the Arabs come in.
Um, IN Italy, you know, the, the collapse is
a similar thing. It just is less territory. So,
um, the collapse of the Justinian order leads to
Lombards coming into Northern Italy and Roman control being
confined more or less to the southern part of
Italy and then a strip of land from, uh,
reaching more. More or less from um the Tyrrhenian
Sea by, by Ostia to the Adriatic um in,
in Ravenna, but it's not stable and Roman control
of that territory um because they are being very
greatly pressed by the Arabs, they don't have resources
to send to actually defend the city of Rome.
And so the secession of the city of Rome
happens really in the middle part of the 8th
century, um, but it happens because When the Roman
state doesn't intervene to defend the city of Rome,
uh, the papacy steps in and starts organizing things
on its own. And the papacy very soon realizes
that, um, you know, the It has separate interests
from the emperors in Constantinople and sometimes the emperors
in Constantinople will use their political authority to do
things that um that are not consistent with what
the Vatican or what the, what the papacy wants
done. Um, AND the popes realized that they have
some leverage, right? They, they can choose to not
cooperate with that state. Um, AND ultimately the Lombards
start also realizing that the Roman state doesn't have
the capacity to defend the city of Rome and
they start pressing on territory, um, and looking like
they are going to conquer the city of Rome.
And so the papacy decides We can either make
a deal with the Lombards. Uh, WE can sort
of pray that the eastern emperor shows up or
we can make a deal with the Franks. And
what the papacy does is they decide we're gonna
actually um remove ourselves from the control of the
eastern Emperor and ally ourselves with the Franks. And
it's a process that unfolds very, you know, slowly
and in a complicated way across more or less
a generation between about 750 to about like 770.
Um, BUT a key part of this is, is
a forged document that's very famous called the donation
of Constantine. Um, THAT appears sometimes in the 8th,
sometime in the 8th century, uh, and was created
to say that, um, when the Emperor Constantine converted
to Christianity, he gave the Western Empire and all
of its territory, including its crown to the Pope
and therefore the Western Empire belonged to the Pope,
uh, and the crown belonged to the Pope. And
so this provides the papacy with leverage to go
to the Franks and say, oh yeah, like we're,
you know, we legitimately should be in charge of
this territory. Everybody knows that this is made up,
right? Even the Franks know this is made up,
um, and anybody who'd ever seen a Roman law
would look at this thing and say this, this
is not a Roman law. Um, BUT it's, it's
rhetorical cover. Uh, AND this ultimately forms the rhetorical
cover that allows for the, the crowning of Charlemagne
in the year 800 AD where the Pope says,
I have, you know, the crown is mine, right?
The Western Empire is mine. I can do what
I want with it. And here is somebody who
is a, a Frankish king. We have this long
relationship with the Franks going back now, you know,
it's 880, so going back 50 years. Um, THEY
have guaranteed our security when the East could not.
And so I, as the person entrusted with this
Western crown, will give it to Charlemagne and Charlemagne,
you are now emperor of the Romans. Um, AND
you know, and it's all based on this, this
kind of fiction that was used to justify the
city of Rome more or less jumping from the
Roman Empire. But I think what's interesting about this
is, you know, when we think of great cities
leaving the Roman Empire, we tend to think of
them being conquered by somebody else. Uh, AND so
it's interesting to realize that the city of Rome
basically just left. It just stepped out. It stepped
out of the state that it created. Um, AND
it stepped out of the state that it created
using a document that said, oh, it has the
legitimacy to do this. Uh, AND so, you know,
if you were to ask 1/9 century pope. Are
you, you know, is, is your entity part of
the Roman state? They'd say, well, yes, of course,
right? There's a direct correlation in a contact um
where we were given the authority to do this
by Constantine and that's, that's Rome, right? So we
have the, the legal right under Roman law to
do what we just did. Um. It's made up,
it's not true at all, but they would say
they have it, and so that actually makes things,
you know, quite interesting. Is Charlemagne a Roman emperor?
No and yes. Um, AND you know, uh, and
in Constantinople, it's interesting because they also say no
and yes for different reasons.
And how about the Holy Roman Empire? I mean,
was it really Roman? Was it really an empire?
What's the deal with it?
Yeah, the, the, the Voltaire question, right? Um, YEAH,
I think that the thing that's interesting about the
Holy Roman Empire is you have a Roman emperor,
but he doesn't actually rule over Romans. Right, so
the, the Roman state in the east is still
a version of this political entity where everybody is
a citizen and there's a sort of stakeholder. And
so everybody in the Roman, so the Roman emperor
is the emperor of Romans in the east, you
know, and, and so when you actually see things
like Um, the Celjuks conquer parts of Roman territory.
They call that territory the Celjuk of Rome because
they, it is, you know, or the Sultanate of
Rome because it is the Sultanate of Roman territory.
Um, AND so, you know, because there are Romans
living there. The Roman emperor in the Holy Roman
Empire, you know, he, he's in charge of the
Romans in the city of Rome, sometimes, sometimes, right?
Depending on how his relationship with the Pope is,
but it's not a Roman state because there aren't
Romans really living under him. It's not, you know,
he is a, a Roman emperor, but there aren't
Roman citizens under him. There's no sort of Roman
institutions or traditions or things that ground people in
Aachen or I don't know where, um, Hamburg to
this Roman state that lived before. Uh, AND so
you have in a sense like a Roman emperor.
But no Romans. And so what is that? Um,
YOU know, I think is, is he, is he
holy? Who knows, right? That's pretty subjective. Is he
Roman? He's not. Um, IS it an empire? Well,
when Voltaire says that it's not really either. It's
some sort of weird hybrid of a constitutional monarchy,
but, um, but When um Charlemagne does this, he
does have an imperial title. But it is a
title among all of the other titles he has
too. He's also the king of Lombardy. He's also
the king of the Franks, um, you know, he
has other titles as well, and the title Roman
Emperor is one of them. And it belongs to
him as a title. In Constantinople, the um emperors
who are reigning in Constantinople, that title doesn't belong
to them. It's conferred upon them by representatives of
the Roman population. It's in a sense an office,
just like the consulship was an office in the
Roman Republic. It's not an office for Charlemagne, right?
It's like a bauble. It's like something you can
show off, but it's not an office and there's
no obligation to actual Romans to do anything in
accordance with that office, right? It's just It's a
nice thing to be able to say.
And so in medieval times, how was the Roman
state? What did it look like?
Uh, SO, It's a very, it's a very long
period we're talking about between the Arab conquest and
then when the, the state I think actually collapses
to the Fourth Crusade. But more or less what
we can imagine is this is a state that's
centered on um what's now kind of Anatolia and
the Balkans, the southern Balkans. It gets bigger and
smaller, but the power base for the Roman state
after the the collapse of the east and the
Arab conquest of the 7th century is really sort
of the area around Istanbul. Um, OR Constantinople, uh,
and then territory in Asia Minor and territory in
the Southern Balkans. It does hold on to Italy
for quite a while. Um, AND so Italy is,
is a part of this. Um, THE last sort
of Roman presence in Italy is not extinguished until
the 11th century. So, um, so for most of
this period, you can imagine sort of southern Italy,
the Southern Balkans, and, and Asia Minor. Um, WHAT
it does and how well it controls that territory
varies over time. So, uh, there are for a
long period in the 8th and, and 9th centuries,
um, Rome struggles to control territory, uh, beyond the
coasts of the Balkans. Um, AND it struggles to
control territory beyond the coastal areas of Asia Minor.
Uh, BY the time you get to the 11th
century, uh, it's, it's pretty firmly in control of
territory all the way up to the Danube in
the Balkans and, you know, all the way across
to what's now sort of the modern Turkish eastern
border and southern border. So, um, so territorially, that's,
that's kind of what we're talking about. Ethnically, um,
mainly the people living in this for most of
that time are, you know, people who identify as
Romans who we would basically call Greeks. Uh, THEY
more or less speak Greek. They are mostly Christian.
Um, THEY are mostly in line with, um, all
of the church councils of up to the 5th
century. So, you know, they're Chalcedonian, they're Nicene, they're,
um, It's a pretty homogeneous territory. As the territory
starts expanding again in the 10th and 11th centuries,
you start getting new people in there. So you
get some Bulgarians, you get some um Slavic people,
uh, and then in the east, you get Armenians
and you get Syrians. That complicates things a little
bit. You even get some Muslims. It's not clear
how many Muslims, but, but you do have Muslim
communities. Um, AND that complicates things a little bit.
Uh, BUT generally speaking, I think when we are
talking about the medieval Roman state. We should imagine
that there is a basic core where these people
share a common history. They share more or less
a common language. They share a common religion, um,
they, they share a common citizenship. They share a
common legal structure, right? This is a much smaller
nation-state than we had, say, in the 4th century,
but this really is something that we have to
imagine functions like a proto nation state at least.
Um, AND, and there are all sort of institutions
that encourage you to think this way, right? So
if you go to church, um, you're gonna hear
things that talk about, you know, your religious life,
but you'll also hear things that talk about political
leaders, you know, like Constantine. Um, THEY, they give
you a kind of grounding in Christianity but also
Romanness. Uh, AND, and so it is a very
well-structured thing to try to, you know, make all
of these people very much understand that they are
still part of this common shared enterprise. Um, AND,
and I think that's an underappreciated skill of the
medieval state because other medieval states in Europe don't
do this. Um, YOU know, this, this is in
a sense a direct descent from the, uh, idea
of like the Polis and the citizenship of the
Polis from like deep antiquity, right? The Roman state
never totally loses that, that connection to this idea
that you belong to something versus, you know, if
you live in France in the year 1000, what
do you belong to? I mean, you know, you're,
you're like in a fiefdom and you're connected somehow
to like a lord or something, but you're not
part of a common project. Uh, IN the way
that, you know, Romans totally understood they were, and
in a way that is totally weirdly anachronistic, right?
It is a very old way of thinking about
your political identity that also looks very modern and,
you know, so there is this, this weird kind
of point of inflection between what came before and
what will come later.
So when does the history that you cover in
the book come to an end? I mean, when
did the death of the Roman state occur and
how did it happen?
Yeah, the death of the Roman state, um, it's
like Hemingway's bankruptcy, right? It, it happens very slowly
and then all at once. Um, THE, the real
crisis the Roman state faces, uh, there's a massive
loss of territory that occurs in the last part
of the 11th century and the Roman state has
to adjust very quickly. It's, it's institutions and its
structures to deal with the fact that a lot
of the people who are important in that state
are from Anatolia and they lost a lot of
their, the territory that supported their wealth and position.
Um, AND there are major, major threats that the
Emperor Alexius Komnenos has to deal with all kind
of at once. And so what he does is
he, he creates a number of sort of measures
of expediency that ultimately don't seem all that serious
at the moment and he probably didn't have much
choice about what he was, you know, how he
was going to deal with these problems. Um, BUT
these measures are impossible to undo. So one of
the things that he does is he um instead
of paying bureaucrats, he gives them the first sort
of slice of the tax revenue from certain regions
of the empire because he doesn't have the money.
And so this, this gets them invested in making
sure those regions are stable and paying their taxes
and it's a good sort of short term way
to get money going. Um, HE has to deal
with Normans that are attacking from, um, from the
West. So he makes an alliance with Venice where
he gives Venice significant trade privileges. Uh, AND did
he really have a choice there? Not, not really.
And the Venetians do beat back the Normans, but
those trade privileges are things that he can never
undo and it undercuts the economic foundations of the
empire in a really significant way and also creates
a precedent where the Genoese then start getting trade
privileges and everybody starts getting trade privileges. Um, BUT
the biggest mistake he makes is, uh, he invites
the Crusades to come through Roman territory. And the
initial idea that Alexius had for the Crusades was
to, um, use Western knights who are Really, really
formidable, um, to go back through the territory in
Asia Minor that the Romans had lost, uh, in
the later part of the 11th century. And, um,
the Crusaders are sold on something different. The Crusaders
are sold on we're going to go to Jerusalem.
And so Alexius, I mean the Romans had not
controlled Jerusalem since the 600s, right? And they, they
had no interest in going to Jerusalem. Um, AND
so what they really wanted was a campaign through
what's now Turkey. Uh, AND the initial phase of
the crusade works that way, but eventually, as one
would expect, um, the Romans realized we cannot send
our troops alongside the Crusaders all the way to
Jerusalem. And so there's a break in, um, relations
and the Crusaders start getting this idea that the
Romans don't like the Crusaders. Um, All of these
things are manageable during the reign of Alexius, but
all of these things spin out of control. Alexius
dies in 1118 and they spin out of control
during the reigns of his successors. Um, AND, and
yet those successors are very capable and so they
manage again this like house of cards pretty well.
But in 1180, uh, the last of those successful,
capable successors dies. You have um a very incapable
successor take over and then a series of civil
wars and during those civil wars, all of these
entities start basically taking advantage of the hollowed out
nature of Roman institutions and this culminates in 1204
with the Fourth Crusade, where the Crusaders intervene in
Another Roman civil war. Ultimately, they put a pretender,
they put an emperor in charge of the city
of Constantinople who promises them things he can't give
them. Um, AND they end up invading and capturing
the city of Constantinople, looting it, and then divvying
up the Roman Empire like it's a series of
fiefdoms. Um, AND there is a Roman resistance to
this in a number of places, right? The, um,
Roman elite in the Balkans, they go to Epirus
and what's now sort of Western Greece. Um, THE
Roman elite in Asia Minor go to the city
of Mysa, uh, modern Iznik in, in Turkey. They
fight resistance movements. Um, Epirus and Nicaea both set
up their own Roman states. The city of Nicaea
ultimately even comes back and takes Constantinople from the
Crusaders, but what the Crusaders had done was they
broke that structure. That citizenship structure, that sort of
common entity. Uh, AND there's a really remarkable letter
that's written by um the Roman Emperor in 1203,
writing to the Pope and saying like basically call
the Crusaders off, you know, that this is what
they're doing is illegal. The Crusaders had said that,
um, you know, that they have a right to
attack the city of Constantinople because they're looking to
put in place the son of the emperor who
had been deposed by the person who's now ruling
in Constantinople. And what the Roman emperor writes to
the Pope, he says, this is not how our
society works. Sons do not have a right to
succeed from their fathers. Um, WHAT we do instead
is we allocate power based on the, uh, representatives
of our citizen body. And the emperor rules through
the consent and choice of those people. He doesn't
rule because he's the son of somebody. He rules
because they have chosen him. Um, AND what the
Crusaders do is they break that. And they actually
do even after they, they take the city, a
delegation of Roman notables comes to try to negotiate
terms and may well have been willing to give
the crusader king of, of Constantinople recognition, and they
send him away. Instead, they're going to do the
way Western do do Constantinople and the empire, what
Westerners do with territory they conquer. They're gonna divide
it up among all of the nobility in there.
And so this I think is the end of
the Roman state. Uh, BECAUSE in Constantinople, clearly what
follows the crusader capture is not a Roman state,
right? It is not connected to what Romulus or
whoever set up in the 8th century. What goes
on in Epirus, it is a Roman state, but
it is a successor state. It doesn't have the
institutional continuity. Um, IT doesn't claim that it is
anything more than kind of a resistance movement for
a few years. Um, AND what happens in Nicaea
also is only a partial group of representatives of
the Roman citizen body that ultimately appoints an emperor,
and they don't do it immediately either. And so
what you have um with the capture of Constantinople
is the breaking of that thread that links the
Roman state of the 13th century to the Roman
state of the 8th century. This doesn't end Roman
political history. The Romans running their own states for
another, um, you know, 200 and almost 260 years.
But it ends that direct continuity. And I think
that's, that's important, um, because I think that continuity
in a sense allows us to really focus on
why this Roman state matters because it tells us
something. You know, it tells us something that is
useful now. Um, AND so, you know, that, that
you can tell the history of the Roman people
for another 700 years. Um, I mean there are
still people identifying as Romans living in islands in
the Aegean into the 1940s. Um, YOU know, when
the Greek state takes over the Aegean islands from
Italy, there are people when the Greeks show up
who talk about, I want to see the Greeks
show up because we are Romans, you know, this
is Still there in the 20th century. But those
Romans are not connected to that state. So the
Roman, so you know I could continue, I could,
you know, even write a second book that goes
the next 700 years of, of Romanness in the
Mediterranean. But again, I think that that lesson is
different. Um, AND the reason that that matters to
us is different than focusing on the Roman state
and its continuity.
Right, so I have one last question then. What
would you say were the factors behind the longevity
of Rome? I mean, in the book you talk,
for example, about the balance between change and tradition.
Could you tell us about that and what other
factors might have played a role here?
Yeah, I think, um, ultimately, There's something in the
DNA of this polity uh that makes it able
to continue to evolve in a way that most
states struggle to do. You know, it's, it's a
state that reaches maturity, um, and is still able
to bring in new people comfortably. It's still able
to bring in new ideas. It's still able to
bring in new religions. It's still able to bring
in new practices. Um, BUT it does it in
a way where it never loses its sense of,
of how it got to be the powerful, um,
entity that it was. So, you know, so in
the United States, there, there is a lot of
conversation about what, what do we do with people
like George Washington. WHO um did immense things to
build this country. But also, um, you know, we're
slaveholders and, you know, and did things we might
be not comfortable with. For Romans what they would
say is You have to honor the contributions of
everybody who made this state great. You might not
agree with everything they did, and that's fine. You
know, you might have somebody from the Roman Republic
who is a pagan. OK, right, but they did
something important for us. So you have um authors
in the 11th century that will say things like,
this person was our Cato. Uh, AND, you know,
and Cato famously. Didn't like Greeks, really didn't like
Greeks. He didn't like Greek philosophy. He obviously was
not a Christian, right? Everything about this person in
the 11th century might be something that Cato would
disagree with, would actually, you know, criticize. But Cato
also represented important positive things for the Romans as
well. And so what Romans were able to do
is to say, you know, this entire legacy, um,
there are good and bad things in it. The
good still matters. We need to stay connected to
that good. We need to acknowledge that there's something
positive that we can take away from what these
people in the past did. We might not agree
with everything. But we need to acknowledge what they
did because it was good for us as a
polity, and it's something that can help us now.
And if we disregard the sacrifices and choices they
made, we are less able to make good choices
and sacrifices now. And so I think this is
the this is the secret of the Roman state,
right? It is always grounded in a sense that
we did things well. And we need to understand
what those were, and we need to keep doing
them, but we didn't do things perfectly. And if
there's a better way to do something or there's
somebody that we can bring in who is more
talented than what we have, we have always done
that. And that's important too. And you know, and
this I think is the secret. This is what
made Rome different and what makes Rome different from
a lot of modern societies too. Um, AND we
like to think modern societies are really good at,
at including people and, and they generally are. But
um, But what Rome was able to do was
include people and also retain that connection to what
it once was. That's the balance that a successful
long-standing society achieves, right? You, you always are able
to reinvigorate yourself with new ideas and new talents
and new approaches, but you don't lose your sense
of yourself either. Uh, AND this I think is
what we can see from Rome, right? You, if
you can do both of those things, You can
last for a really, really long time as a
society, and not just like Exist. You can thrive,
and you can thrive in a way that makes
the life of, I mean probably a billion people
over time, maybe more than that, lived as Romans.
You can make the life of those people better.
By doing both of those things in a way
that is balanced, um, and that I think is
a contribution that is timeless. Uh, AND that's a
contribution that I think Rome alone allows us to
appreciate.
Great. So this has been a very fascinating conversation
about the Romans, and the book is again the
Romans 2000 year History. I'm of course leaving a
link to it in the description of the interview,
and it's been a very fascinating read, and I
can't recommend it enough. Dr. Watts, thank you so
much for writing it and thank you for coming
on the show again. It's always a big pleasure
to talk to you.
Oh, absolutely. I, I love coming on the show
and these are, it's always such great questions, so
I, I am so grateful to you for doing
this.
Hi guys, thank you for watching this interview until
the end. If you liked it, please share it,
leave a like and hit the subscription button. The
show is brought to you by Enlights, Learning and
Development done differently. Check their website at lights.com and
also please consider supporting the show on Patreon or
PayPal. I would also like to give a huge
thank you to my main patrons and PayPal supporters,
Perergo Larsson, Jerry Mulleran, Frederick Sundo, Bernard Seyaz Olaf,
Alex, Adam Cassel, Matthew Whittingberrd, Arnaud Wolf, Tim Hollis,
Eric Elena, John Connors, Philip Forrest Connolly. Then Dmitri
Robert Windegerru Inai Zu Mark Nevs, Colin Holbrookfield, Governor,
Michel Stormir, Samuel Andre, Francis Forti Agnun, Svergoo, and
Hal Herzognon, Michel Jonathan Labrarith, John Yardston, and Samuel
Cerri, Hines, Mark Smith, John Ware, Tom Hammel, Sardusran,
David Sloan Wilson, Yasilla Dezara Romain Roach, Diego Londono
Correa. Yannik Punter DaRosmani, Charlotte Blis Nicole Barbaro, Adam
Hunt, Pavlostazevski, Alec Baka Madison, Gary G. Alman, Semov,
Zal Adrian Yei Poltontin, John Barboza, Julian Price, Edward
Hall, Edin Bronner, Douglas Fry, Franco Bartolotti, Gabriel P
Scortez or Suliliski, Scott Zachary Fish, Tim Duffyani Smith,
and Wisman. Daniel Friedman, William Buckner, Paul Georg Jarno,
Luke Lovai, Georgios Theophannus, Chris Williamson, Peter Wolozin, David
Williams, Dio Costa, Anton Ericsson, Charles Murray, Alex Shaw,
Marie Martinez, Coralli Chevalier, Bangalore atheists, Larry D. Lee
Junior. Old Eringbon. Esterri, Michael Bailey, then Spurber, Robert
Grassy, Zigoren, Jeff McMahon, Jake Zul, Barnabas Raddix, Mark
Kempel, Thomas Dovner, Luke Neeson, Chris Story, Kimberly Johnson,
Benjamin Galbert, Jessica Nowicki, Linda Brendan, Nicholas Carlson, Ismael
Bensleyman. George Ekoriati, Valentine Steinmann, Per Crawley, Kate Van
Goler, Alexander Ebert, Liam Dunaway, BR, Massoud Ali Mohammadi,
Perpendicular, Jannes Hetner, Ursula Guinov, Gregory Hastings, David Pinsov,
Sean Nelson, Mike Levin. And Josnecht. A special thanks
to my producers Iar Webb, Jim Frank Lucas Stink,
Tom Venneden, Bernard Curtis Dixon, Benedict Mueller, Thomas Trumbull,
Catherine and Patrick Tobin, John Carlo Montenegro, Al Nick
Cortiz, and Nick Golden, and to my executive producers,
Matthew Lavender, Sergio Quadrian, Bogdan Kanis, and Rosie. Thank
you for all.